In the following, we discuss four salient boundaries of generative AI that, we argue, are important limi-
tations in real-world applications. The following limitations are of technical nature in that they refer to
how current generative AI models make inferences, and, hence, the limitations arise at the model level.
Because of this, it is likely that limitations will persist in the long run, with system- and application-level
implications.
Incorrect outputs. Generative AI models may produce output with errors. This is owed to the
underlying nature of machine learning models relying on probabilistic algorithms for making inferences.
For example, generative AI models generate the most probable response to a prompt, not necessarily
the correct response. As such, challenges arise as, by now, outputs are indistinguishable from authentic
content and may present misinformation or deceive users (Spitale et al., 2023). In LLMs, this problem in
emergent behavior is called hallucination (Ji et al., 2023), which refers to mistakes in the generated text
that are semantically or syntactically plausible but are actually nonsensical or incorrect. In other words,
the generative AI model produces content that is not based on any facts or evidence, but rather on its own
assumptions or biases. Moreover, the output of generative AI, especially that of LLMs, is typically not
easily verifiable.
The correctness of generative AI models is highly dependent on the quality of training data and the
according learning process. Generative AI systems and applications can implement correctness checks
to inhibit certain outputs. Yet, due to the black-box nature of state-of-the-art AI models (Rai, 2020),
the usage of such systems critically hinges on users’ trust in reliable outputs. The closed source of
commercial off-the-shelf generative AI systems aggravates this fact and prohibits further tuning and re-
training of the models. One solution for addressing the downstream implications of incorrect outputs is
to use generative AI to produce explanations or references, which can then be verified by users. However,
such explanations are again probabilistic and thus subject to errors; nevertheless, they may help users in
their judgment and decision-making when to accept outputs of generative AI and when not.
Bias and fairness. Societal biases permeate everyday human-generated content (Eskreis-Winkler
and Fishbach, 2022). The unbiasedness of vanilla generative AI is very much dependent on the quality
of training data and the alignment process. Training deep learning models on biased data can amplify
human biases, replicate toxic language, or perpetuate stereotypes of gender, sexual orientation, political
11
leaning, or religion (e.g., Caliskan et al., 2017; Hartmann et al., 2023b). Recent studies expose the
harmful biases embedded in multimodal generative AI models such as CLIP (contrastive language-image
pre-training; Wolfe et al. (2022)) and the CLIP-filtered LAION dataset (Birhane et al., 2021), which are
core components of generative AI models (e.g., Dall-E 2 or Stable Diffusion). Human biases can also
creep into the models in other stages of the model engineering process. For instruction-based language
models, the RLHF process is an additional source of bias (OpenAI, 2023b). Careful coding guidelines
and quality checks can help address these risks.
Addressing bias and thus fairness in AI receives increasing attention in the academic literature (De-
Arteaga et al., 2022; Dolata et al., 2022; Ferrara, 2023; Feuerriegel et al., 2020; Schramowski et al., 2022;
von Zahn et al., 2022), but remains an open and ongoing research question. For example, the developers
of Stable Diffusion flag “probing and understanding the limitations and biases of generative models” as
an important research area (Rombach et al., 2022). Some scholars even attest to models certain moral
self-correcting capabilities (Ganguli et al., 2023), which may attenuate concerns of embedded biases and
result in more fairness. In addition, on the system and application level, mitigation mechanisms can be
implemented to address biases embedded in the deep learning models and create more diverse outputs
(e.g., updating the prompts “under the hood” as done by Dall-E 2 to increase the demographic diversity
of the outputs). Yet, more research is needed to get closer to the notion of fair AI.
Copyright violation. Generative AI models, systems, and applications may cause a violation of
copyright laws because they can produce outputs that resemble or even copy existing works without
permission or compensation to the original creators (Smits and Borghuis, 2022). Here, two potential
infringement risks are common. On the one hand, generative AI may make illegal copies of a work, thus
violating the reproduction right of creators. Among others, this may happen when a generative AI was
trained on original content that is protected by copyright but where the generative AI produces copies.
Hence, a typical implication is that the training data for building generative AI systems must be free of
copyrights. Crucially, copyright violation may nevertheless still happen even when the generative AI has
never seen a copyrighted work before, such as, for example, when it simply produces a trademarked logo
similar to that of Adidas but without having never seen that logo before. On the other hand, generative
AI may prepare derivative works, thus violating the transformation right of creators. To this end, legal
questions arise around the balance of originality and creativity in generative AI systems. Along these
lines, legal questions also arise around who holds the intellectual property for works (including patents)
12
produced by a generative AI.
Environmental concerns. Lastly, there are substantial environmental concerns from developing
and using generative AI systems due to the fact that such systems are typically built around large-scale
neural networks, and, therefore, their development and operation consume large amounts of electricity
with immense negative carbon footprint (Schwartz et al., 2020). For example, the carbon emission for
training a generative AI model such as GPT-3 was estimated to have produced the equivalent of 552 t CO2
and thus amounts to the annual CO2 emissions of several dozens of households (Khan, 2021). Owing to
this, there are ongoing efforts in AI research to make the development and deployment of AI algorithms
more carbon-friendly, through more efficient training algorithms, through compressing the size of neural
network architectures, and through optimized hardware (Schwartz et al., 2020).